Index Anywhere: Finally write down picture I had for indexing and mutations in writing (#23)
web3-storage/RFC: rfc/index-anywhere.md

# Index Anywhere

## Background

W3Up heavily leverages Dynamo DB to store various indexes about the system state which is then leveraged during it's operation. It is worth calling out that in most cases (or cases where we put enough design consideration) Dynamo DB is an index over signed [UCAN]s, put it different signed [UCAN]s represent source of truth and Dynamo is an index to facilitate efficient queries.

### Dependency on AWS

Use of Dynamo for indexing ties critical component of the system to the proprietary AWS stack. It is worth calling out we have explored other DBs like [PostgreSQL], [Cloudflare KV] and [FaunaDB] and Dynamo proved to be the best choice so far.

> Despite success with Dynamo it is not practical choice for exposing our index to the rest of the network, because we'd like network to replicate index as opposed to drive our operational costs by number of queries.

Author: Yes that is exactly what I meant. Just an example to illustrate what I mean and not what I think we want would be if everyone querying could have their own replica of our dynamo DB and they can run whatever queries they need on their replicas.

> Despite success with Dynamo it is not practical choice for exposing our index to the rest of the network, because we'd like network to replicate index as opposed to drive our operational costs by number of queries.

Author: > data being queried must also be distributed?

I guess it depends what you mean by data here, if you mean data that was indexed then No, but if you mean index records themselves then Yes

> Despite success with Dynamo it is not practical choice for exposing our index to the rest of the network, because we'd like network to replicate index as opposed to drive our operational costs by number of queries.

Author: ```suggestion
Despite success with Dynamo it is not practical choice for an index in a distributed network, as it introduces central point of failure (owner of the db) and drives up operational costs (of the db owner) with every query served. 
```

Does reframing it this way makes more sense ?

> Despite success with Dynamo it is not practical choice for exposing our index to the rest of the network, because we'd like network to replicate index as opposed to drive our operational costs by number of queries.

Reviewer: That is much more clear IMO.

> Despite success with Dynamo it is not practical choice for exposing our index to the rest of the network, because we'd like network to replicate index as opposed to drive our operational costs by number of queries.

Author: ```suggestion
Despite success with Dynamo it is not practical choice for an index in a distributed network, as it introduces central point of failure (owner of the db) and drives up operational costs (of the db owner) with every query served. 
```

### Requirements

- Replica level [ACID] transactional guarantees
- Efficient syn
- Partial syn
- Underlying storage flexibility
- Efficient queries (comparable to what we get with Dynamo)

## Proposal

Prolly Trees provide a great foundation for efficient, potentially partial sync and were [demonstrated to be implementable on top of key value stores][prolly-tree kv]. We could implement Dynamo backend for [Okra] which would create means for replication and we could leverage some of the existing backends to replicate index in other nodes.

> > ❗️ There is an assumption that Prolly Tree on top of Dynamo would be efficient enough to make added overhead non issue.

Author: That is interesting, I was assuming that having prolly tree on top of dynamo would give best of the both worlds. Comparable performance in our current system and flexibility to choosing backends optimized for constraints of their runtime.

I'd be very hesitant to switch to yet another DB in our system given our prior history those, or at least I would not tie two endeavors together

### Query System

> It is important to recognize that Prolly Tree is effectively a merkelized key value store, which is inferior in query ability to Dynamo DB. More importantly key value stores tend to impose higher upfront design costs and are less flexible to schema changes which can be deal breaker.

Author: ```suggestion
It is important to recognize that Prolly Tree is effectively a merkelized key value store, which is far more constrained query interface than what Dynamo DB offers. More importantly, key value stores tend to impose higher upfront design costs and are less flexible to schema changes which can be deal breaker.
```

@gammazero does rephrasing it this way makes it more concrete ?

> It is important to recognize that Prolly Tree is effectively a merkelized key value store, which is inferior in query ability to Dynamo DB. More importantly key value stores tend to impose higher upfront design costs and are less flexible to schema changes which can be deal breaker.

Reviewer: Yes

Luckily however graph oriented data bases like [Datomic] provide a very flexible query system, yet are [implemented on top of key value stores][Datomic interanls]. In addition it is designed such that all queries run locally, they simply sync shallow (three level deep) tree and fetch leaves containing packed groups of related records as needed and store them in local [MRU cache] for the future queries. This is a great fit because we do not want to drive system operational costs, instead we could leverage our storage layer for storing packed records and only shallow tree sync with replicas.

> ℹ️ In fact records get grouped such that related records end up in the same group which could be leveraged by domain specific applications.

> Put it more simply we could put datomic inspired datalog engine on top of Prolly Trees to regain desired flexibility and efficiency of queries and derive all other requirements from the Prolly Tree itself. As an added benefit Prolly Tree could be materialized an IPLD DAG making it ecosystem native.

Reviewer: Where would the Prolly Tree and its underlying data be stored? With the blob index?

If a user's data is replicated to multiple locations, is the prolly tree also replicated?

Author: I would imagine it would be stored in every user agent (that user has) probably as a local IPLD dag (although in some cases maybe indexdb or leveldb wolud be a better choice). On the server I imagine we would (at least initially) store it using key value store and dynamo would be what I'd try first.

For the reference [canvas.xyz demonstrated an effective way to represent prolly tree using key value stores](https://docs.canvas.xyz/blog/2023-05-04-merklizing-the-key-value-store.html#key-value-stores-all-the-way-down)
